Good morning and welcome.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm Apple's IOT Technology Evangelist,
and I'm a Bluetooth Bluetooth.
Thank you for coming today.
We're really,
really pleased and excited with
our success with Bluetooth in
the last year or so.
We've been doing this
for about a year now,
and we're really happy about it.
This is one of those things
that comes out of left field.
We're watching for new hardware devices.
We're evangelizing gaming device makers,
computer makers,
and suddenly something comes
along which is unexpected,
so we're pleased when things come back.
Today,
what we're going to go into is an update
on where we are with Bluetooth and
give a little sense of what kind of
products we'd like to see in the future,
what kind of things we'd
like to see in the future.
So, having said that,
I'm going to bring up Eric Brown.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So that's what we had in our
1.0 release back in Jaguar.
Well, over the past year,
we've shipped a number of software
updates that added a number of new
both user and developer features that
you might or might not be aware of.
So through these releases,
we've added support in addition
to the Object Push profile.
We now have the File Transfer Profiler,
FTP for short,
that whereas Object Push allows you
to send single files back and forth,
you can actually do both
directory listings and treat
it much like a file system.
So we've added support to
Bluetooth File Exchange as well
as our system services so that
you can go browse other systems,
actually seeing some kind of cool
devices you can connect up to,
palms and access file systems.
There's even a little portable
hard drive that's kind of
need to be connected up to it,
read and write files from it,
just keep it in your backpack,
we're pretty nice.
In our latest release,
we added support for the HIT program,
so with that you can use
Bluetooth Keyboard to mice,
it just works,
it makes it really easy to set up.
As far as the setup process goes,
we've added a new Bluetooth Setup
Assistant that provides a nice easy
step-by-step approach to configuring
new devices and makes it so that
hopefully your mother can actually
go and configure a Bluetooth device.
As a part of the work
that we've been doing,
we looked at how serial port
services have been in the system,
and as we kept adding features to it,
we decided that those just
getting a little too complicated
for the average user,
so what we've done is taken
those serial port configuration
out of preference panel where
it was for the original release,
and added a separate application,
Bluetooth Serial Utility,
that provides all of the more power user
options for configuring serial ports.
And we also then, in removing that from
the preferences pane,
we've reworked that a little bit
and added a new devices tab that
makes it really easy to make changes.
So it provides a kind of a
one-stop shop to configure that.
As a part of the work that
we've done over the past year,
we've also added some new and
updated APIs to the existing
services that we provide already.
So most of the main objects we've
added some new features to that
I'll talk about in a little bit.
So Bluetooth device, L2CAP channel,
our COM channel, all really have been,
has some new features as well.
We've added some new features to that.
We've added a bunch of new
support to the UI elements,
both with the user visible
features and one developer API.
And as always,
all of the APIs that we provide are
in both C and Objective-C versions,
so we've compared between the two.
So we've been getting a lot of questions
about the HID support in the system.
How do I customize the HID device?
I've got some special things
I want to do with the HID device.
So it's probably a good idea to
go ahead and tell you a little bit
about how that works in the system.
So what we've done is we provide
a full compliant HID class driver.
So we've pretty much done
all the work for you there.
When you configure a new HID device,
there'll be a HID class
driver that loads up,
connects to the device,
takes care of all of the profile
specific issues and talking
with the Bluetooth partner.
And what this does is that makes
the device itself accessible
through the HID manager APIs.
So if you need to do some custom
things with the HID device,
you can just use the HID manager APIs.
You shouldn't even touch
the hardware at all.
Which is kind of a good thing because
we don't actually give you access
in the kernel to the hardware.
So that's really the
only place you can do it.
Now, if you have really
have a need to do this,
Craig Keithley, our developer contact,
is the person to talk to.
There's maybe some things that can
be done if it's absolutely necessary.
But hopefully, you'll be able to do it.
Hopefully, we've made it so that you
don't have to do that.
I want to talk a little bit about the
way that the Bluetooth serial ports
work on the system and the way that
the serial utilities use the figure.
So again, as I was saying,
we decided that the settings were just
a little too complex for novice users.
So we created the serial utility
application that now gives you full
control over the creation of the ports.
It's currently the only
way to create those ports.
So it's kind of good
to know how it works.
There are really two different
types of serial ports that are
subtly different semantics.
So it's good to treat them independently.
There's incoming ports
and outgoing ports.
Now, with a normal serial cable,
you don't have to worry about it.
You connect up the cable.
You talk to the device on the end.
It's not incoming or outgoing.
But with Bluetooth,
it's a little bit different.
So with incoming serial ports,
a device itself will
connect up to the system,
and any device can connect to a
particular serial port service.
And the application that is
listening on that serial port will
get the data from that device.
Now, as a result of that,
the device is going to,
or the application rather,
is going to connect up and
attempt to use the port before
there's anything connected.
So in that particular case,
it treats it just like you would a
serial port with no cable connected.
If you do a read, you don't get any data.
If you write to it,
it just goes to bit bucket.
Once an incoming
connection is established,
it gets routed automatically
to the application that
has the serial port open,
has an outstanding read,
and just automatically
starts passing data.
As far as outgoing serial
ports are concerned,
it's up to the user to configure
the single outgoing port
works with a single device.
So they select the device,
they can select any RFCOM-based
service on the device,
and that serial port becomes configured.
When you go to open up that
port in an application,
the system will go and attempt
to connect to the device,
attempt to open up the necessary channels
to create the data pipes for that port.
Now, one possible problem here
is that this open process is
actually can be quite lengthy.
If the device isn't present,
there are timeouts associated with it.
So you might spend 10,
15 seconds in the synchronous open
call waiting for a connection to fail.
So as a result, it's not always resulting
in the best user experience.
So, now that we know kind of
how the serial ports work,
I want to tell you that we really
recommend that you don't use them.
They're really for legacy support.
If you've got an application
that's already written that
needs to use serial ports,
or maybe for debugging purposes,
it's a little bit easier, that's fine,
but for a number of the
reasons I've mentioned,
it's really an inefficient way to do it.
You can get full access to
those serial ports by using
the RFCOM APIs that we provide.
And those APIs provide you with a
much richer set of functionality.
It gives you a lot better and
more granular error reporting.
You get a lot more direct control
over the channel creation and the
behavior of the channel itself,
as well as provide a lot
more information about it.
Again,
we can't recommend this technique enough.
It just will result in a
lot better applications.
In addition to the serial port changes,
we've added a number of features
in our UI elements that make
the user experience a lot nicer.
Now, to support that,
we've added a couple of new
device categories.
So we've allowed now the concept of
favorite device or multiple favorite
devices so that if you have a device
that you use over and over again,
you just mark it as a favorite
and then every time you go in any
application to one of our UI panels,
that device will be accessible.
So if you say you always say send
files over to your Palm or want to
send new applications to your Palm,
now you can just use the
Bluetooth file exchange.
Every time you go to send a file,
Palm's going to be listed right
there as a favorite device.
So you don't have to spend time going
through a lengthy discovery process
every time you want to send a file.
We've also added support for
recent devices where we keep
track of each connection that's
established and we'll go ahead and
list those in most recent first.
So if you're sending contacts to
your phone and you've got three
different ones you want to send,
as soon as you've sent that first one,
it now shows up in your recent list.
So you can keep selecting that
phone over and over again.
So again, it drastically speeds up the
process where you're doing
more than one thing at once.
In the UI itself,
we've added new filters that let
you filter by those categories.
So say you only want
to see your favorites,
you can easily do that.
Only want to see recents or
just the discovered devices,
you can do all of those things.
As well, we've let you filter by
the actual type of device,
so computer, PDA, phones.
So if you're in an environment that
tend to have a lot of Bluetooth devices,
which we're not there yet, but someday,
we'll actually let you easily
go and find the specific device
you're looking for without having
to wade through a long list.
In addition to those user features,
there's a number of new pieces of
API that make things a lot better in
the UI elements that allow you to,
for example,
run PanelModal or as a sheet,
full control over all of the text
that actually appears on the panel.
So the title bar, the description,
the prompt that's used,
and the button to select the device are
fully customizable by the application,
and as well, lets you fully localize the
information that you put in there.
So you should be able to do pretty much
anything you want with these panels.
We've also added support for filtering
and validating user selection.
So if you know you want to connect to,
say, an object push service on a device,
you can tell the panel that I only want
devices to let the user select a device
that supports the object push service.
In that case,
it will actually go and verify,
it'll do an SCP query,
it'll verify the device has that
service before finalizing the selection.
Your code returns,
you'll know that the device,
it'll basically give you the
service that you asked for.
You know that the device has it,
you don't have to worry
about doing it yourself.
All of these new APIs are
fully header-docked,
and they're consistent across
all the different UI elements,
so once you learn it for one,
it applies to all of them.
To support the new different
categories and device types,
we've added some new API onto the
IO Bluetooth device object itself.
So we've got a whole slew of
API to manage the favorite devices.
It lets you get to list the
currently logged in users' favorites,
lets you check to see if a single
device is actually a favorite,
and then you can even add and remove
the device from the favorites as well.
So hopefully you only do that at the user
prompting and not just behind their back,
because they probably
wouldn't like it too much.
But we also add, finally,
API to access the paired devices,
so you can get a list of all
the system-paired devices,
as well as find out if an
individual device is paired.
And then in order to support recent,
we've added a recent access date
attribute to the device object.
So it lets you see when the
device was most recently accessed,
and there's API that lets you get
the list of the end most recently
accessed device for the user.
So say you only have room for the 5G.
So you can just call this API,
and it will return you the 5
most recent devices for the user.
Additionally, we've added a lot of new
functionality in the,
basically in our L2CAP and RFCOM layers.
The original set of APIs we had worked,
but there wasn't really a
distinction between asynchronous
and synchronous versions of the API.
So the APIs that were
there were kind of a...
and the rest of the team.
Thank you.
There's a number of new notifications
about channel state changes.
Now, all of these new APIs are available
only in 10.2.5 and forward.
So, if you do make use of them,
you will need to be
dependent upon 10.2.5.
However, we highly recommend that you
do this because these new APIs,
especially for asynchronous behavior,
really lets you provide a
much better user experience.
You can really improve the
application responsiveness,
avoid the spinning
cursor in a lot of cases,
since a number of the operations
tend to take a long time,
especially in the failure cases.
So, it's really worthwhile to use
the asynchronous APIs so that the
user doesn't have to feel like
the application isn't responding.
Within the L2CAP channel object,
in order to support the
new asynchronous behavior,
we've added the concept
of a channel delegate.
And what it does,
it allows the delegate to then
receive the necessary callbacks,
notifications,
and events that go along with the
different happenings in the system.
So the delegate will get new
incoming data when it'll get the
channel open complete notification,
it'll get notified when
the channel gets closed,
when it gets reconfigured.
This is a new one that
we didn't have before,
so if the L2CAP channel itself
goes through the configuration
process to get some new parameters,
it will do that.
It's also then a write
complete notification,
so it's kind of a one-stop
shop for all the asynchronous
notifications within the channel.
The APIs for those are divided
into a couple different categories.
We've got a couple new APIs on
Bluetooth device that lets
you both open the channel
asynchronously or synchronously.
Now,
as a result of the new channel delegate,
every channel has to have
a delegate when opened.
So, since that is now the one way to
receive incoming data notifications,
for example,
it's a requirement that there is a
delegate that at least implements
the incoming data callback.
Otherwise, if data comes in,
it would just get dropped on the floor.
So, pretty much have to have that set up.
The old method that was
used to open the channel,
as we are going to be deprecating that,
so we definitely recommend that
you move to these new APIs.
It's just generally a lot better.
You know whether it's a synchronous call,
you know whether it's
an asynchronous call.
It really defines what the behavior
is rather than kind of leaving it
up to how we've decided to do it.
We also have new asynchronous write
methods on the L2CAP channel objects.
So we've got writeAsync
and writeSync that,
again, behave the same way.
It does the right thing
in the right place.
The asynchronous write will go
ahead and return right away.
It's not going to block on you.
It lets, you know, gives you a real good
user experience with that.
Both of these replace the old write call.
RFCOM channel has APIs really similar.
There's a new RFCOM channel delegate
object that gets the same messages
when there's new incoming data,
channel open/closed.
RFCOM has some additional control
signals and flow control information
that are communicated to the delegate.
Gets a write complete notification
and then there's a new queue space
available notification that I'll explain
in a little more detail in a minute.
For the RFCOM APIs,
we have the same kind of channel
open APIs on the Bluetooth device
object itself for opening
a channel synchronously,
asynchronously.
As with L2CAP,
the delegate is required to
be able to open a new channel.
And as with L2CAP,
we're going to be deprecating the old
open RFCOM channel method as well.
The RFCOM channel APIs itself have,
as you'd expect, write async,
write sync versions that are
going to be replacing the old
write and write simple methods.
Now,
we're also deprecating the old incoming
data listener and incoming event listener
methods because all of those listeners
are now replaced by the delegate.
Everything goes to the one
place in the delegate object.
Now, one of the things that in
doing these fully synchronous,
fully asynchronous
APIs with RFCOM channels,
a little different than L2CAP,
is that RFCOM provides flow control.
So, we're basically told when we can
and when we can't write data.
So,
in the case where we can't write data,
we have to queue it up internally.
Now, in order to avoid having just
an unbounded queue space,
there are some maximums set within
the channel that are pretty high.
It's unlikely you're going to
run into a case where you're
queuing up too much data,
but it's possible.
So, in order to deal with
that situation nicely,
we've added the case where a write call
may fail with a KR return no space error.
So, if that happens,
we will then subsequently call
the delegate the queue space
available notification once the
queue is actually available again.
So, you can easily just pen that
operation until you're notified
that we have queue space again.
It's pretty much a common operation when
dealing with a system with flow control.
Now, we've also gotten a number
of questions about how
SDP services work in the system.
It's not straightforward to
just go and add new services,
so I thought it's a good idea to talk
a little bit about how that works.
You pretty much,
if you're looking to add support
for new Bluetooth profiles,
or maybe you want to
write your own profile,
like maybe your chat service
or something like that,
you will likely need to add
services to the system so that
other devices can find that service.
So, we've defined really
two types of services,
transient and persistent.
A transient service is, as implied,
it's going to only exist
for a short period of time.
In our case,
what we've done is we've defined
that amount of time to be the
running time for the application
that registers to the service.
So, as soon as that application dies,
exits, is quit by the user,
we're going to remove that service.
So, you don't have to worry
about cleaning up,
it'll just go away for you.
Persistent Service is
a little bit better,
where, maybe not better,
but more useful in some cases anyway,
where it will stick around
outside of the scope of the
application that registered it.
So, it'll exist through reboots.
It doesn't actually require that
your client application be running.
It can be configured to go and
automatically launch an application
when an incoming connection
is created to the service.
Now the service itself,
we've defined a dictionary format to
describe how a particular service looks.
So the dictionary itself has
individual entries where each entry
corresponds to an SDP attribute.
Now that format itself is a little
bit in-depth and a little bit
more that we can go into here,
but it should be fully
documented in the HeaderDoc.
And if you do have any
questions about it,
we've got a developer mailing list,
so we'd be more than happy to help
you with anything you need there.
In addition to the format itself,
some of the attributes will
actually be defined by the system.
So the service record handle and
RFCOM channel ID are the two that are
currently assigned by the systems.
That way,
there's a single namespace essentially
for the record handles and channel IDs,
so we have to manage that internally.
We also have this additional local
attributes attribute that lets
you specify some custom controls.
So we have controls for a
particular service that control
the behavior of the system with
regards to that single service.
Currently,
we only have two supported attributes.
Persistent attributes, as you'd expect,
it's a Boolean attribute
that if it's set to true,
it indicates that the service
will exist until you remove it.
If it's either missing or false,
then that service will be removed
as soon as the application exits.
There's also a target application that
specifies a particular application
to launch when an incoming connection
to that service is established.
So, that pretty much will only work
when there's a logged-in user.
So, when that user's logged in,
connection to, say,
you've created your new chat service,
and you've said, oh,
here's my chat application to
launch when somebody connects to it,
well, what happened then?
It'll go and launch that application
as the currently logged-in user.
So,
it's just like they're running an app.
Now,
you don't actually have to have a target
application for persistent service,
but it's more useful in that case.
You might want to have a running
process like a menu extra
or something that provides
notifications on the states of things,
so you can set up even a
persistent service without
launching your application,
and a running app can get
notifications for that service.
Additionally,
we're likely to add new local attributes
to control additional things about the
way that individual services behave.
Now in order to actually
add a new service,
we've got a function out of Bluetooth,
Add Service Stick.
It's pretty simple to use,
and what we've done is for the
service dictionary description,
we've defined it so that it only
uses the native plist data types.
So it makes it real easy.
You can define your service
actually in a plist file,
load it in, and then call add service
with that dictionary.
So you don't have to create a lot of
code to build up a complex dictionary.
You can just do it in the file.
It makes it real easy.
This particular function will
actually return a newly created
Bluetooth SDP service record that
includes all of the attributes
that were signed by the system.
So one thing to really take
note here is that if you're
creating a persistent service,
the client has to remember the
record handle returned in this
particular service record,
because that record handle
actually is then used in the remove
service with record handle call.
So if it doesn't remember it,
then you're kind of stuck.
You need to know that
to remove that service.
So in this particular case,
the transient services you
don't need to worry about,
they'll be removed automatically for you.
But again, if, say,
you only want a service to exist for not
for the entire run of the application,
but just part of it,
you'll need to remember that
as well for columnist function.
Thank you.
So,
I've got a number of helpful hints here.
We've got some sample code that does a
number of the things I've talked about.
We've got the RFCOM server
sample is actually a,
it's a simple chat server
that goes along with,
there's an RFCOM client sample.
Well, the server code shows how to,
it has its own plist file with the
dictionary format set for a sort
of a fictional custom chat service.
It also shows how to load that in,
how to set up the service,
save off the handle,
and then remove it when needed.
Now, in case you do get
into a situation where,
say, your code crashed and
didn't save off the handle,
or if you forgot to implement
the code to save it off,
it is possible to remove it
with a little bit of surgery.
So, in this case,
there's the blueD.plist file in the
Roots Library Preferences directory.
So, you can remove that file.
It will remove your service.
It will also remove all of the other
cached information on your system.
So, I definitely recommend only doing
this as a last-ditch effort,
because you will lose
all the device names,
device services.
You'll lose all your pairings.
So, it's useful as a developer tool,
but definitely not for the end user.
So now, how do you actually get
access to these new APIs?
Well, we are currently in the last stages
of working on an SDK that will
be based on the R1025 release.
Keep checking the developer site
because it will be up there real soon.
It includes all the APIs that
I've talked about here.
It also includes support
for Packet Decoder,
which, as some of you have noticed,
in one of our software updates,
we disabled it for security reasons.
The Packet Decoder itself would allow
pretty much anybody access to all of the
traffic going over your Bluetooth link,
and that includes link key
data with the hid stuff,
hid data.
They could snoop your
keyboards and everything.
So by default, in production builds,
all of the support for Packet
Decoder is completely removed.
The SDK itself includes a build
that has that turned back on,
so all you need to do to use
that application and develop your
new services is just install the
SDK and you'll get support for it.
So now I'd like to turn the
presentation over to Mike Larson.
He's a Bluetooth technology manager.
He's going to talk about kind
of new directions and new what's
going on in the Bluetooth industry.
Thanks, Eric.
It's been a long year.
There's been a lot going on.
Bluetooth industry has
really come a long way.
The few industry events I've attended,
it's gone from how do we create
this brand-new technology and
get people to adopt it to,
okay, it's out there,
it's starting to become
successful and in lots of devices,
what do we have to do now?
The push is largely for
simple configuration.
People are realizing that
if it takes more than five
minutes to configure a device,
the user's going to drop it on the
floor and not touch it again and say,
this doesn't work.
Along those lines,
the special interest group has
now started what they call the
five-minute ready initiative.
What they're looking for there is a
five-minute out-of-box experience.
And as the industry shows,
others are pushing for even sooner.
I've heard as low as 30 seconds.
So that's the goal.
What else has happened in terms of
Bluetooth devices over the last year?
The user interfaces have
gotten a lot simpler.
If you've been an early adopter of this,
like I've been,
you've been able to notice that the
user interface has moved from five
or six levels deep in a device to
right at the foreground with the new
devices like the Sony Ericsson T610.
So that's the direction this is going.
People are starting to take this
seriously and figure out a way to get the
user up and running in very little time.
There are a few changes coming on
on the technology side from the
Bluetooth SIG and the industry.
The first one is late this year,
they're coming out with version 1.2.
They have a few features included there.
The primary one is improved
quality of service,
which means that you can
guarantee that your HID devices
will get time to transfer their
HID data when they need to,
and other quality of service-dependent
devices will get the time
they need when they need it.
Another feature of version 1.2
is adaptive frequency hopping.
What AFH is going to provide is better
coexistence of Bluetooth devices
with other 2.4 GHz devices.
In order for AFH to
work and be successful,
it does require a version 1.2
radio on both sides of the link.
Now that said,
this is something you're going
to want to consider if you're
building a hardware device.
If you have the choice and are
making radio decisions now,
check with your vendors and make
sure that the radio that you're
going to use for your device will
be 1.2 capable and will support AFH.
It will help you out and it will
help your users out down the road.
Past the end of this year
and onto the next horizon,
sometime next year hopefully,
the Bluetooth SIG and the technology
leaders are looking at medium data rate.
This will require a new radio.
Today's radios aren't likely
to be upgradable through
firmware to support this.
It will require new hardware.
What does medium data rate give you?
It gives you up to 2 to 3 megabit per
second throughput on a single channel.
So that's currently
scheduled for mid-next year.
We hope everything comes
together and that will allow
a few more Bluetooth devices
to exist on a single link.
Get some new things using Bluetooth.
There are a few things that we've
noticed in the last year and a half,
two years that we've been
playing with Bluetooth.
And here are a few of our notes
that will help you out and make
your Bluetooth devices coexist
with the rest of the world.
Inquiry operations and paging operations,
which are device discovery and
creating connections respectively,
they really disrupt 802.11
traffic as well as other
Bluetooth traffic on the link.
For that reason and a couple others,
we do not plan to offer
a direct inquiry API.
Accessing the inquiry API is
possible through our user interface.
Another thing to make note of is 720
kilobits per second is the total link
budget for bandwidth and throughput.
If you assume that that is the
budget available for your connection,
you're not going to be very
kind to other connections.
And you will not get that throughput
if the user is selected to use
a Bluetooth keyboard or a mouse
because the quality of service
constraints will require us to
access those devices as well.
So if you need a full 700
kilobits of bandwidth,
Bluetooth is probably the wrong
choice for your wireless connectivity.
If you need somewhat less
than that and can coexist and
deal with less throughput,
then it's a good choice.
This goes back to the point I mentioned
on the last slide where paging
operations disrupt both existing
Bluetooth traffic and 802.11 traffic.
In order to find out if
devices are within range,
a loop of paging to find if the
device is there and connect to it
is not a real good use of resources.
It's not kind to the other
people using the link,
and it's not kind to the 802.11
connections that are in place.
Now I'd like to introduce Craig Keithley,
who's going to talk about some
opportunities that are out there in
the Bluetooth world for our customers.
Thank you very much.
Thanks, Mike.
So there are a number of opportunities.
In fact, before I came up on stage today,
we were talking with Mike,
and he just got back from
the Bluetooth Congress,
and he tells me that my price point
of $75 for a low-cost serial adapter
is too high and that it should
be doable at $40 based on some
new chipsets that are coming out.
So scratch that and put $40 in there.
We do want to see more HID devices,
and I'm particularly interested in
seeing gaming devices come along.
There are some gamepads, for example,
that are RF-based,
but they work with the USB adapter,
custom one.
I'd like to see those go to Bluetooth.
The I3A Committee,
which is the organization
that deals with specifications
for digital stealth cameras,
does have a PTP over
Bluetooth specification and development.
For those of you who
aren't familiar with PTP,
it's Picture Transport Protocol.
It's the core of which our image
capture architecture is based.
All the command sets that
are in image capture,
all those that architecture
is structuring.
So there's USB PTP cameras
available today,
built in support with a
profile or a USB class driver.
There's a FireWire PTP class
specification in works,
and we want to see that extended
to digital stealth cameras as well.
I've seen some GPS receivers,
samples that are just in
prototype form now that have
a Bluetooth interface on them,
and I think that would be a very cool
device to have to be able to get your
GPS location over Bluetooth wirelessly.
Application-wise, this is a somewhat
challenging area for us.
Certainly, the silent clicker is a
nice innovative product.
The question now is,
what other things can
you do application-front?
I'd like to hear about them.
If you've got ideas,
you want to have us help
you with marketing efforts,
please contact me.
That actually goes for all
of Bluetooth products that
you might be working on.
I'm looking at stuff that
we can do at Next Macworld
San Francisco for a Bluetooth area,
and I'd like to be able
to highlight products,
so please do contact me if you've
got something in the works.
The Bluetooth hardware solutions, well,
so serial and audio are the ones
that are presently on our minds.
Our hardware is capable
of supporting SEO.
We haven't released any
profile support for that yet.
We should, if all things go well,
be able to do that in the future.
What I do want to encourage people to
do is to pay attention that SEO and
its current implementation is not
adequate for doing speech recognition.
So the SEO-based cell
phone-style headsets,
although we may be able to support
them in the operating system,
would not be something that
I want you to plan on using with
our speech recognition engine.
If you do an advanced audio product,
however, where you can do, say,
stereo headphones or you can get
good sample rates on the microphone,
that's something I'm very
interested in working with you on.
I want to make sure that we have
support in our speech recognition
engine for those types of devices.
So as a just general rule,
if you're working on advanced audio,
we need 22 kilohertz,
16-bit resolution to be able
to do good speech recognition.
So as was mentioned earlier,
we haven't put anything in the kernel.
For developers,
it's not released to Darwin.
I'm able to consider some specialized
requests that I then need to go work
with marketing and engineering on to make
sure that it's the right thing to do.
But I do want to hear from you if you
need to do something in the kernel.
So the roadmap, well,
this was yesterday's session,
but as you're aware,
we do have DVDs that come out
usually about three months
after developer conference,
so that's one session you should look at.
The other thing is that,
and I should have put it on the slide,
Friday morning at 9 o'clock in this room,
we have a HID and force feedback session.
And if you're doing HID devices,
or you want to be able to
access a Bluetooth HID device,
you should come to this session.
As was mentioned,
we really are strongly encouraging
people to do everything that's
HID-related through the HID manager.
So that includes Bluetooth, and in fact,
it could include almost
any transport protocol.
We could do HID controls over FireWire,
for that matter.
The representation of a HID device
with a HID-style report descriptor
and getting HID reports will
come in through the HID manager,
regardless of the transport
layer in the future.
And that's where we want
people to go to get HID data.
Thank you.
So contact-wise,
there's the standard list.
I do encourage all of you to take a look
at the Bluetooth developer mailing list.
I've got a long mural there,
but look for list.apple.com and then
click on the lists on that website.
There's a lot of lists run by us.
Bluetooth is one of them,
and you should go there to
participate in discussions with
other Bluetooth developers.
Our standard reference library stuff.